Europe is deeply diverse and it’s thanks to all the
different groups of people who helped build its history.
And it is only by championing “unity in diversity”,
as the EU’s own motto states, that Europe will
succeed in building a future in which human rights
and fundamental freedoms are respected for all.
But a Europe of States stifles the diversity of all
European peoples. Our political party, the European
Free Alliance, is the voice
for those peoples that are
struggling with central governments
to secure recognition
of their rights.
The most important of those
rights is the right to decide
your own destiny — the right of self-determination.
In its latest term, the European Parliament saw
events that were entirely new to the European Union:
Through referendums in Scotland in 2014 and Catalonia
in 2017, the right of self-determination was
exercised in a democratic and exemplary manner.
Respect for the choices taken by these peoples
forms the very basis of democracy.
Catalonia — a victim of repression over half a century
— will be a key issue for the European Union
in the forthcoming parliamentary session. The EU’s
democratic credibility is at stake, as Spain regresses
towards an authoritarian regime and casts aside
respect for the fundamental freedoms that Europe
has a duty to ensure.
We also need to find an answer that enables the
Scottish people to remain in the European Union
despite Brexit, in accordance with the will of the
great majority of Scotland’s citizens.
Beyond these two symbolic cases, historical groups
of European people throughout the Union are seeking
more and more freedom and — through either independence
or full autonomy — the ability to exercise
their right to decide their own futures.
The European institutions are therefore in need of
comprehensive reform so that all of Europe’s peoples
can participate in the decisions that concern
them. The EFA is the party and political grouping
that, since the first directly elected European Parliament,
has most consistently promoted this message
as essential to Europe’s future. Our Members
of the European Parliament have defended all the
peoples, nations and minorities that the Europe of
States overlooks.
At a time when these questions are intensely relevant,
it is important for our group in the European
Parliament to bring more weight to bear. To do so, we
need to have higher numbers and be better united.
This 2019 EFA manifesto lays the policy foundations
for this group. It will provide a common basis
throughout the 2019-2024 parliamentary term.
Introduction
Building a Europe fit
for all its Peoples
Our political party is the
voice for those peoples that
are struggling with central
governments to secure
recognition of their rights.
1 - Self-determination
A right for all peoples
The European Free Alliance unites political parties
working across different types of institutional realities.
Work to improve the prospects for all Europeans
depends on the EFA’s unfailing support for the
right to self-determination. The EFA believes that
all peoples have the right to choose their own destiny
and an institutional framework that empowers
them.
Whether this involves respect of linguistic and
cultural rights, devolution, expansion of regional
or federal powers, demands for autonomy, or the
achievement of independence through referendum
— all proposals that allow groups of people
to express themselves and define their own institutions
in a democratic, transparent, gradual and
peaceful way must be supported.
Self-determination is a principle, enshrined in international
law, that can be adapted to the different
situations faced by peoples under the jurisdiction
of European states. It allows all peoples to choose
what is best for them, for their development, and in
some cases their survival.
The EFA supports the peoples, nations and regions
that are acting democratically and that respect the
European Convention on Human Rights. Equal rights,
dignity and respect for diversity are the principles
underlying the right of self-determination.
Changing the European political project is one of the
objectives of the European Free Alliance. We believe
that the Europe of old nation-states no longer satisfies
the democratic demand for empowerment
among Europe’s peoples.
The recognition and support of Europe’s peoples,
regions, nations and stateless nations is needed to
restore public confidence in the EU and promote a
new 21st century democracy that makes the European
project a success for everyone.
In a truly diverse and
united Europe, national
and regional identity go
hand-in-hand with European
identity. The concept
of national identity
must also be renewed
over time. By creating a
sense of belonging to a
community with a shared
destiny, we can ensure
that new populations who settle in our regions and
stateless nations are not ignored.
Nation-building in the 21st century must involve
all of the nation’s citizens. Respective
diasporas must also be recognised, allowing
people to reconnect with those abroad or integrating
them back if they wish to do so.
“The EFA believes
that all peoples
have the right
to choose their
own destiny and
an institutional
framework that
empowers them.“
A Europe of all peoples is a Europe that makes no
distinction between peoples, without creating
categories or second-class citizens. The EFA wants
another Europe, a different Europe, which recognises
the universality of all people as well as their
distinct identities.
Since it was founded in 1981, the European Free Alliance
has always believed that the European project
must be based on the well-being and diversity of its
peoples. The European Union can
no longer satisfy itself with just
being a union of nation-states
that promote their own interests.
The EFA has a broader,
more inclusive vision of Europe
that recognises and fosters its
diversity.
By being profoundly pro-European,
we support a Europe for everyone. For the EFA
it is fundamental that Europe accepts and includes
all peoples in the decision-making process, so as to
build a democratic Europe of peace, respect and solidarity.
The EFA would like to build a resolutely social Europe,
a welcoming Europe, a Europe that is prosperous for
every one of its citizen and that respects its own plurality.
Euroscepticism and/or anti-EU populism do
not bring solutions. Europe must invest more in its
communities by empowering the social fabric and
building ties between people. An inclusive approach
that welcomes new citizens is essential to strengthening
our sense of identity and community.
To reinforce the role of ALL peoples, sub-state
nations and/or regions with legislative powers must
play a role in European decision-making. They should
be given a strengthened presence in an “Assembly
of Regions and Peoples,” replacing the toothless
Committee of the Regions. This would ensure that
ALL groups have direct participation, with voice and
vote, in the decisions affecting them.
The EFA defends a Europe in which the European
Parliament has the clear and logical right to initiate
new legislation, and where the legislative process
in the Council is transparent. The president of
the European Commission should be elected democratically.
It is TIME for the European Union to work
for all peoples in Europe.
2 - A Europe
of all peoples
The EFA wants another
Europe, a different
Europe, which recognises
the universality of all
people as well as their
distinct identities.
The European Union was founded after the Second
World War to secure peace as well as economic and
social prosperity. Its principle missions are to maintain
peace within its borders, defend values such as
democracy internationally, and to ensure the rule
of law, respect for human rights and fundamental
freedoms. Unfortunately, the EU institutions and
member states fall short of defending these core
values and civil liberties. Instead, the EU positions
itself in opposition to a Europe of the Peoples.
By building a
Europe of the
Peoples, the European
Free Alliance aims to support all peoples,
including minorities, as well as nations, stateless
nations and regions that peacefully aspire to political,
cultural and linguistic recognition and recognition
of their democratic institutions.
Europe has to defend sub-state level democratic
institutions if it wants to defend democracy, peace
and freedom within its borders.
The European Union today faces rising international
tensions. The migration crisis inside the Union, the
jihadi threat, and the question of internal enlargement
posed by Scotland and Catalonia
— it is time to construct another Europe.
The EFA supports a Europe that can meet the challenges
of the 21st century. That’s not just a Europe
without war, but also one that stands out for the
recognition of its minorities, the right to self-determination
and the unconditional respect of the
dignity of people and respect for human rights.
Based on those fundamental and democratic principles,
the priority must be to prevent new conflict
and resolve existing conflict through dialogue, as
well as tackling all the consequences of conflict with
special care for victims and political prisoners.
Cultural and linguistic diversity, social justice and
the right of self-determination are inter-related.
A new project for the Europe of Peoples is needed
to meet the democratic challenges and provide the
empowerment that Europe’s peoples aspire to.
The EFA seeks a modern, ambitious and prosperous
Europe, not just economically, but also socially and
democratically. It calls on the European Union to be
more than ever a Europe of all peoples and regions
where democracy, development, respect for human
rights and fundamental freedoms complement one
another.
3 - A plan for Peace
& Freedom for Europe
It is time to construct
another Europe.
The principles of growth and development that underpin
our modern society have led to the depletion of
resources, climate change and a loss of biodiversity
across the planet. The plunder of resources merely
for financial ends is not consistent with sustainable
development.
The European Free Alliance has supported and
defended greater
protection of the environment
and biodiversity
since it was
founded. It seeks to
limit the impact of
human activities on
the environment and
protect European citizens
from all environmental
risks to their
health; such as the prohibition of genetically modified
organisms and glyphosate.
More efforts should be made to reconcile the interests
of important national and regional agriculture
and fisheries industries with the EU’s climate
change goals. Innovation in regional sectors can
boost sustainable and organic agriculture, fisheries
and rural development and lead to a more
comprehensive regional policy.
To achieve this, the EFA favours an energy policy that
prioritises energy efficiency and renewable generation.
Fossil fuels are CO2-intensive and destined to
disappear.
The European Union must anticipate these changes
by creating an ambitious energy policy — in line
with the United Nations’ 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development — that supports the development
of sustainable alternatives to transition away from
fossil fuels. The EFA is also against fracking as it
leaves regions and nations facing the risk of groundwater
contamination. It is essential that our regions
and nations exercise more energy sovereignty,
deciding on the forms of alternative energy to generate,
at what price, and under which circumstances.
Although we support the wide autonomy of regions
in defining their energy production, the EFA calls for
the phaseout of nuclear power. The production and
storage of radioactive waste remains too great a
danger to impose on future generations. During the
energy transition, solid guarantees for low prices,
abundant supply and safety need to be put in place.
Policies and measures to promote sustainable
development cannot be successfully implemented
without appropriate governance. The
EFA also supports all the European initiatives and
programmes aimed at encouraging all players to
engage in the decision-making process, as it gives
us the opportunity to develop a more concerted,
balanced and fairer approach to the advancement
of Europe’s regions and stateless nations.
The EFA supports renewable energy research in
European regions and nations. It also encourages
regions and nations to take part in research so that
they can positively influence local and European
politics around renewable energy and energy efficiency.
4 - Building a
sustainable world
The European Union must
anticipate by creating
an ambitious energy
policy that supports the
development of sustainable
alternatives to transition
away from fossil fuels.
Defending and promoting language diversity is one
of the principles of the European Free Alliance.
The European Union’s support for multilingualism is
primarily focused on encouraging the use of official
languages. The EFA, on the other hand, believes all
languages are part of our intangible heritage — and
demands the official recognition, promotion and
use of regional, minority and lesser-used languages
threatened with extinction.
A Europe of different peoples,
different cultures,
different languages: This
is the Europe that the EFA
wants to promote and
support, in the interest of all European citizens. We
want to value all languages from the EU’s historical
and cultural communities, to protect the richness
of our linguistic diversity.
Specific European programmes are therefore needed
to ensure linguistic justice. Furthermore, all European
institutions need to support the Council of Europe’s
work in making sure that every member state
ratifies the European Charter of Regional or Minority
Languages and implements its measures.
European languages and cultures form our cultural
diversity. They contribute to the ecological balance
of our societies, the way biodiversity does in nature.
In many cases they are also a formidable tool for creativity
and economic development through innovation
and the promotion of local heritage.
European languages have a crucial role to play in
the growth and cultural enrichment of local heritage.
This is why the EU’s language policy must protect and
preserve its diversity, including minority languages.
To establish linguistic justice, we need to create
equality between languages.
5 - From Linguistic diversity
to Linguistic Justice
To establish linguistic
justice, we need to create
equality between languages.
Gender equality may be a core value for the EU, but
European women still have unequal access to power,
prosperity and safety. A structural system of male
dominance, patriarchal traditions and heteronormativity
has facilitated the systematic oppression
of women and LGBTQI+
(Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual,
Trans, Queer and Intersex)
individuals in both private
and public spheres.
The EFA’s core mission
and work is grounded in
the understanding that
women have diverse
needs and identities.
This is particularly true
for women in minority, stateless, migrant, disabled
and LGBT+ groups, as well as those who are young
and elderly, rural and poor. They face greater levels
of exploitation, discrimination and violence, and are
marginalised from the political arena.
Women are still underrepresented in positions of
power and decision-making throughout Europe. The
EFA believes that the participation of women in public
and political life guarantees fairer, more democratic
and more diverse societies. We therefore fully support
gender parity and recognise that Europe needs more
feminist leadership — leadership that values diversity
and makes space for women, particularly from
minorities and other vulnerable groups.
Women, children and the elderly are most heavily
affected by economic crises, and financial instability
and cuts in public spending have exacerbated
poverty among women in recent years.
The EFA promotes economic independence for
women by strengthening EU equality legislation,
guaranteeing individual rights to social protection
and taxation, ending gender pay and pension gaps
and providing social care, parental leave and childcare.
Not only should women and men be equal
carers of children, the elderly and people with disabilities
— we also support the creation of decent
work for women, in particular with new employment
opportunities in social entrepreneurship, the digital
economy and other innovative fields.
Moreover, violence against women still constitutes
the most widespread violation of women’s human
rights in Europe. Addressing old and new forms
of violence is a priority for the EFA. We call for
gender-sensitive, evidence-based and comprehensive
public policies to stop violence against
women — ranging from legally-binding instruments
to awareness-raising activities — with sufficient
human and financial resources. We call for more
services that protect, assist and inform women
when they seek help; improved access to and safety
in police, judiciary and healthcare systems; widespread
sexual and reproductive health and education;
better support for women’s organisations and
NGOs; and campaigns that deconstruct myths about
gender violence.
We believe that LGBTQI+ voices and experiences
need to be heard and affirmed. LGBTQI+ people
are vulnerable and have historically experienced
hostility and violence. Laws against hate crime and
hate speech need to be consistent and cover homophobia
and transphobia in all EU member states. The
EFA campaigns for rights and equality by calling for
safe and inclusive education, supporting an inclusive
understanding of family, building cross-cultural
solidarity and including youth perspectives.
Currently in the EU, discrimination on the grounds
of sexual orientation is only prohibited in the field of
employment. We want to see this expanded to other
areas like healthcare, education, social protection
and access to goods and services.
The EFA demands that the European Union improve
its antidiscrimination laws by mainstreaming
gender into all fields under its competence. The
EU must consider women’s diversity and adopt
appropriate measures to combat different forms
of discrimination. We call on the EU to measure
equality and the impact of new and existing policies
and legislation, and to prioritize gender sensitive
and inclusive EU budgeting.
6 - Promoting
gender equality
The EFA campaigns for
rights and equality by
calling for safe and inclusive
education, supporting an
inclusive understanding
of family, building crosscultural
solidarity and
including youth perspectives.
Some regions, peoples and stateless nations in the
European Union stand in the shadow of centralised
states. These states have exploited the natural resources
of territories, used their labour and developed
predatory economic models aimed at disadvantaging
local minority populations compared with
the majorities in these member states.
The European Free Alliance believes that all peoples,
in all their diversity, are equal in dignity. Social
and political dominance shouldn’t be permitted.
Social justice is a key priority in our programme. We
fight against any form of discrimination and promote
a more equitable distribution of wealth. The EU
should be giving more guarantees for social justice,
but instead it too often sides with vested interests,
big corporations and large member states.
Establishing equality between peoples is crucial
to empowering the European Union’s regions and
stateless nations, economically, socially, culturally
and politically.
The EFA supports the European Pillar of Social Rights,
which aims to give citizens new and more effective
rights. It includes three main components:
• Equal opportunities and access to the labour
market
• Fair working conditions
• Social protection and inclusion
Europe-wide solidarity mechanisms should combat
child poverty, the gender gap, generational poverty
and social exclusion in many other policy fields.
But this is only possible if all regions and nations improve
their fiscal coordination and harmonise their
efforts to fight against tax fraud, tax evasion, tax havens
and disloyal unethical fiscal engineering.
The EU must combat social insecurity and growing
inequalities. Local communities
should have
more rights and opportunities,
particularly in
choosing their own model
of development. Subsidiarity
is a key word that is
not being implemented.
To achieve genuinely
sustainable development,
the economic development of regions and
nations should be better connected at the local
level, taking into account the characteristics
of the territories and people involved.
The human dimension, and respect for human
dignity, should play a bigger role in social
and economic policies — it should be
placed at the heart of public policies.
7 - Restoring dignity
and equality
Social justice is a
key priority in our
programme. We fight
against any form of
discrimination and
promote a more
equitable distribution
of wealth.
Member states are too quick to blame the European
Union for all of the troubles European citizens are
facing. This led to Brexit — the United Kingdom’s
intended withdrawal from the European Union —
and to other negative developments in Europe.
The European Free Alliance will therefore continue
to support a revision of the European project,
to offset its democratic deficit in adapting to
new challenges — in particular that of participatory
democracy and the involvement of peoples in the
European decision-
making process.
The EFA supports
the principle of
the Citizens’
Initiative, introduced
by the Treaty of Lisbon, which enables European
citizens to call on the European Commission
to draft a proposal on an issue that they believe
needs legislation. It is a first step towards involving
all peoples in EU decision-making, although it is
overly bureaucratic and inaccessible to the public,
so needs to be radically improved.
Public confidence and involvement can only improve
if the European institutions become more democratic,
in particular by strengthening the European
Parliament’s legislative powers and establishing
meaningful constituencies for European elections,
and a fair electoral system that allows for the representation
of all European peoples. The EFA wants
to see greater transparency in the Council and the
democratic election of the European Commission
president by the European Parliament.
The EFA also believes that greater use of the internet
would make it possible to better inform people
and make public action more transparent — especially
nowadays, as the spread of internet use makes
it easier for governments to interact with those
they govern. It regrets that the EU’s information
platforms and sites are only available in official and
certain co-official languages.
Lastly, Europe’s peoples and stateless nations
want their claims to be handled democratically.
The EFA also supports referendums or public consultations
organised by the institutions of elected
representatives in the European Union’s regions.
Bringing citizens closer to their institutions,
respecting all peoples and putting them in their
rightful place in the decision-making process at
the local and European levels to address the crisis
of representation that is evident in the falling electoral
turnout: These are the main challenges if participatory
democracy is to become a reality rather
than just an aspiration.
8 - Democratic processes
& participatory democracy
The EFA also believes that greater
use of the internet would make it
possible to better inform people
and make public action more
transparent.
Solidarity between peoples is one of the principles of
the European Free Alliance. It has forged an international
network with partners through cross-border
cooperation and mutual support between regions
and stateless nations, in Europe and around
the world. Many of the partners whose linguistic,
cultural and political rights have been and continue
to be trampled upon by member states work together
in full solidarity for a better world.
While state nationalism is inward-looking and based
on exclusion, the European Free Alliance’s vision of
the peoples’ nationalism is the opposite. It involves
inclusion, respect for diversity, and bridge-building
between peoples, rather than the fortification of borders
between them. It starts from the recognition
of all nations as equals, respecting their rights and
identities. In that sense, the EFA is in favor of the cooperation
of free and equal peoples.
That is why internationally, the EFA stands shoulder-
to-shoulder with ALL peoples suffering from
oppression: It wants European and international organisations
to demand the respect of human rights
by every state concerned, according to international
law, and to apply sanctions if needed.
The EFA supports measures to strengthen the rights
of minorities in Europe and around the world. Europe
must use its influence on international disputes,
especially in countries with which it maintains diplomatic
ties and cooperation programmes.
The EFA believes that the different peoples of Europe
and worldwide should be able to create their own
forms of governance and institutions. The rightful
aspirations of those who want to restore their sovereignty,
supported by international solidarity, are
entirely legitimate.
We are on a path towards the construction of an international
order in which new forms of government,
more suited to our times, replace those of the past,
which are gradually losing their raison d’être.
The EFA wants the European Union to become a
real international player whose goal is to bring more
peace, solidarity, prosperity, sustainability, democracy
and respect for diversity, not only in Europe but
around the world.
On migration, the EFA pushes for strong solidarity
with countries and regions at the EU borders that
are particularly affected by the arrival of people from
outside the EU. Every member state must be involved
in inclusive policies for migrants.
We need to invest in communities outside the EU,
and in the EU’s in peripheral areas, to stop emigration
and any form of brain drain. That also requires
us to invest outside the EU and in our peripheral areas
to encourage better inclusion of new citizens. We
need to work together to empower our communities
and our society.
9 - International
solidarity
The EFA wants European and
international organisations to
demand the respect of human
rights by every state concerned,
according to international law,
and to apply sanctions if needed.
One of the principles of self-determination is to
empower people so they can take action by themselves.
That is why the emancipation of our countries
should start with the emancipation of our citizens,
and most particularly youngsters.
As those at the forefront of our future society, young
people must play prominent roles as both the targets
and the decision-makers of political policies. This is
why the European Free Alliance, through its youth
branch, EFAy, is
highly committed
to ensuring full
opportunities for
young people and
to increasing their
participation in
society.
To guarantee equal opportunities for everyone, the
EFA will promote policies to tackle youth unemployment,
brain drain and poverty, paying special
attention to the deprived and peripheral regions of
Europe where young people struggle to pursue their
own future. To do that, we will work on measures
to improve education and employment for young
people. In particular, we want to promote initiatives
aimed at strengthening local and regional economies
and creating stable, safe and respectable
jobs. The precarious situation of youth employment,
including the proliferation of unpaid internships and
temporary jobs, calls for immediate action on the
protection of labour rights and decent income, so
as to encourage the development of a fair professional
life.
We will also table policies to address the youth brain
drain from the peripheries of Europe to more prosperous
areas. We want to create a successful environment
at home and encourage young people to
bring the skills they learn abroad back to their local
communities.
Education is one of the key pillars for any policy
aimed at youth. A high-quality education at all levels
(primary, secondary and higher) guarantees not only
good professional development, but also cultural
interests, open-mindedness, critical perspective
and other skills that can help enrich lives.
To increase the role of young people in society, we
will also work to create more relevant spaces for
participation. The goal is to train young people in
democratic processes and transmit their views and
opinions to decision-makers. To that end, we want
to strengthen youth civil society by promoting
youth NGOs, student unions, young workers’ unions,
youth councils, informal education organisations,
etc. A virtuous citizenship is an organised one.
New generations are particularly responsible for
ensuring that the world is free of hate speech,
intolerance and xenophobia. This is even more true
for young people from stateless nations. As usual
targets of cultural discrimination, they have to be
champions of integration and diversity. That is why
the EFA and EFAy promote intercultural dialogue
between people and minorities from every corner
of the world, particularly those who live together
in the European continent.
10 - Empowering
Young people
The EFA and EFAy promote
intercultural dialogue between
people and minorities from every
corner of the world, particularly
those who live together in the
European continent.
European Free Alliance
Your political party
The European Free Alliance (EFA) is a European
political party recognized by the European Parliament
since 2004. EFA is financed by the European
Parliament and its 45 member parties from across
the EU and EU candidates. EFA is represented by 11
elected Members at the European Parliament.
Our core principal is the right for all peoples to
decide – the right to self-determination, which is
a fundamental principle recognized by international
law (Article 1 of the Charter of United
Nations).
Our activities focus on human, civil,
and political rights, democracy, internal enlargement,
multi-level governance, devolution of powers,
cultural and linguistic diversity.
We are a pro-European party that endorses the European
Union’s values – liberty, democracy, human
rights, fundamental freedoms and the rule of law.
We represent the interests of stateless nations and
peoples, national minorities and minority language
groups. We believe that all peoples should have the
power to decide on their own destiny and the right to
their own institutions that will help them achieve this.
We believe in another Europe – where Brittany,
Elsass and Vojvodina have more autonomy, where
Wales, Scotland, Catalonia and Bavaria become
independent, where the true history and ethnicity
of Macedonians is acknowledged, where languages
like Kashubian, Sardinian, Cornish or Frysian are
recognized and promoted.
We believe in another
Europe, and you?
